---
layout: post
title: 5 year reflection of myself as a software engineer
---

I've been working full time as a software engineer since Feb 2020. The next month will mark my 5 year career as a software engineer. If I include pre-professional time as an undergrad research assistant in 2017-2018 and an intern in 2018-2019, I have been involved in software development for 8 years now. I want to write a little reflection on my professional career so far with some tips I have for other younger people trying to get into the tech industry.

First, let me talk about my college years.

I started my coursework at Iowa State back in Jan 2017. I got a couple of research assistant positions as well as teaching assistant positions throughout my college years. I worked on several projects, but the most impactful one I am proud of is [Primer Server project](https://takasoft.io/blog/ncur-primer-server) in which I developed the backend and frontend from scratch. It is essentially a graphical interface to design a PCR primer, a DNA fragment that is used in the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) to amplify a specific region of DNA. PCR became a mainstream word during the COVID pandemic. I worked with a bioinformatics PhD student who worked on the Python library for computing the PCR primers. At the end of the project, I presented the research at the National Conference on Undergraduate Research and I open-sourced the code to the public.

I was lucky to get a recruiter from PayPal to reach out to me after the completion of the project. I successfully passed all the interview rounds and I ended up working as an intern at PayPal in Silicon Valley for 2 summers in 2018 and 2019. At PayPal, I worked in the network security team focused on firewall administration. At the time I was there, they were starting to adopt more cloud solutions, but the large part of PayPal's infrastructure still ran on top of virtual machines in in-house data centers. Most of virtual machine networking was maintained manually by network security engineers. There were a lot of opportunities for improvements in the process. I worked in a small software development team focused on developing python automation and scripting around firewall administration. The main project I worked on as an intern was a web application to automate the firewall rule creation. The manual process was that internal customers cut a ticket to the team, and the engineers manually review the ticket and create the firewall rules in Palo Alto Network firewalls that run on the virtual machines. This process took several days. With the web application I worked on, this process time went down to a few hours.

PayPal at the time had an excellent internship program. I have a lot of good memories. I lived with other interns at a company-paid housing in a really nice neighborhood in San Jose. I went to a lot of events to network with other smart interns from all kinds of backgrounds. A cruise trip in San Francisco bay, a MLB match at Levi's Stadium, Santa Cruz amusement park, and even a disco party at San Jose science museum (one of the intern program managers was a professional DJ and they rented the whole museum at night!). The intern pay was pretty good, for my org, it was actually even better than other intern programs at other top companies such as Apple, Tesla and Amazon. PayPal seems to have gone downhill after my time, but I'm really glad that I was able to experience one of the best intern programs at that time.

At the end of my college years, [I competed at ICPC](https://takasoft.io/blog/icpc-na-championship), a competitive programming contest, and learned quite a lot about the deep world of algorithms.

Now here are some reflections on my college years.

I recommend doing research positions to any undergrads. Pay might not be great, but you don't do this for pay, you do this to pursue your interests and build experience on your resume. This was a really good decision I made, and I am fortunate to attend a college that offered many research opportunities.

Now, the internship part. Although I enjoyed my internship time and learned a lot, I wasn't learning enough to prepare for full time software development jobs. Now that I know real world software development, I think that the team I was in was lacking a lot of software development best practices such as automated build pipelines, integration testing, system monitors, and rigorous code reviews, and also it was a bit siloed from the rest of PayPal software development teams, which didn't help me to learn. The team I was working at was a small sub team that came out from within the main network security team. I didn't really notice this issue at that time.

Another mistake was not focusing on the business impact of the project I worked on. I didn't have impacts/results focused mindset at the time. At the end of the project I needed to demo my project to some higher ups, it seemed that this demo didn't go so well due to my inability to explain the business impacts. The web application itself was working pretty well and it was already getting used in the production, but I was just focused on the technical implementation side of it and was ignorant about business impacts.

Intern at a different company every year. Don't stay in your comfort zone. After my first summer of internship, I got a little comfortable and didn't apply for other internship positions at different companies. I should have tried different opportunities so I could learn new things. I got pretty stressed out during interviews. I didn't really want to go through the stress. During your pre-professional time you should try out as many different opportunities as possible so you know what's a good environment to keep learning and growing.

Another piece of advice. Take as many algorithms and data structures (DSA) courses as you can and participate in competitive programming as early as possible if your college offers it . Although a lot of people say that DSA is useless for real world jobs, that's not the case for FAANG jobs and FAANG equivalent level jobs. They expect a deep level understanding in all fields of DSA in their interview process. The internship interview that I passed has mostly asked Leetcode easy level problems with just a bit of medium level. The ICPC bar was really high, but I joined this game really late in the last year of my college, and I was mostly focused on a specific area and I didn't have a broad understanding in other fields of DSA.

Now I'm going to talk about my professional career.

After I graduated, I decided to take an opportunity at a startup in 2020 which I wanted to try out after trying both academia and a big company. I moved to Austin, Texas to commute to their office everyday but as everyone knows the pandemic hit and I ended up working 100% remotely. It was a company that started out of Shark Tank, I met a lot of unconventional people and it was really fun to ride the super growth wave during the pandemic time. Unlike big tech where most of the engineers I see are people with tech degree and tech experience, startup people are a lot more diverse.

I initially focused on the development of testing automation frameworks and testing environments. The systems were several Ruby monoliths running on AWS. Ruby is losing popularity but it was the golden standard before and it is still a pretty common architecture in startup space. I wasn't doing customer impacting software development until my second year.

At this company, I learned what it's like to work in a real world software development team. Build pipelines, system monitors, feature flagging, load testing, code reviews, all those basic things that software engineers need to know. Through the development of testing frameworks, I got quite good inspirations for breaking software, which is also an important feature as a software engineer.

Now here's my reflection. I did pretty well with getting promoted here. I got a pay raise twice during my year and a half there. I had a growth mindset. Developing testing environments was fun but I wasn't making impacts on the real customers of the business. I think that I should have gotten into the customer impacting team in the first place. Top companies really focus on what exact impacts you have made to the business. If you are mostly focused on testing environments, your impression will be pretty weak. After moving to a highly customer impacting team, the code reviews were a lot more rigorous and I learned a lot about how to write good code in Ruby. It was fun to get feedback directly from customers and stakeholders.

During the pandemic, I converted my car into a camper and I traveled to a lot of places across many states by my car. The epic nature of America really blew my mind, one of the places I really loved was Glacier National Park. The deep valley of the mountains makes you feel like you are flying. I naturally headed west to see more nature and I ended up in the Seattle area, where I still stay.

In the middle of 2021 a lot of recruiters started reaching out to me, one of them was from Amazon. It seemed like they were doing mass hiring. For this interview preparation, I did a lot of Leetcode. I was already getting really rusty on DSA because I didn't touch any of DSA stuff after college. I struggled quite a lot. I should have kept learning DSA after college. I was really nervous in the interviews but I was able to solve most of the coding problems, and did pretty well in the behavioral one as well by focusing on the impacts I made. Salary negotiation also went well and I got an offer that was more than 50% higher than what I was making at that time. The key really was focusing on impacts and practicing DSA skills.

Now, moving onto my current job at Amazon. Since it's my current job, I cannot go into too much detail but I want to emphasize one main point. Focusing on the business impacts.

I joined Amazon as SDE1. I was basically the same level as other new fresh grads. It's pretty common to get downgraded to junior level at a FAANG level company even if you had a prior mid level job at a smaller company. This is because the level of impacts you make are at a different scale. At FAANG level companies, you get to make a lot bigger business impacts in terms of dollar amount, the number of users, technical complexities, amount of data, and etc. Even if your day to day job might not be that different, what matters in the tech world at the end is how much impact you make and your ability to explain the impacts. In tech, people don't really care how hard you work. In fact, a lot of senior level engineers I personally know don't work long hours, but they have laser focus on the impacts they make through their solutions.

One thing I didn't learn in my previous company was the importance of design docs. I think it's pretty common at a small company but you are too busy just implementing features and fixing bugs, and you actually don't get to write a detailed design doc for your projects. This was the case for myself and I was a bit surprised when I was first asked to write a design doc with diagrams and stuff.

Here, I also made a similar mistake as my first full time job. I focused a bit too much on improving integration testing, reducing tech debt, and fixing bugs, basically operational excellence (OE) things. Of course, OE is extremely important in engineering, but I should have chosen my projects in such a way that I can make higher impacts in the organization, which I can use for promotion (promo) docs. Some people I know got promoted from SDE1 to SDE2 in less than 2 years, in the meanwhile, it took me 3 and half years considering my first job as SDE1 level.

At a big company, promotion involves rigorous reviews by various people outside of your team. You need to demonstrate a very compelling reason to promote you. I didn't get into this game of getting promoted until I was already more than a year at Amazon. I was a bit clueless and I thought I would just get promoted naturally as I worked on more projects, which is never the case. As a result, it took me longer years than other people to get promoted. The time also coincided with the 2022 tech slump where tech stocks crashed and the company started doing layoffs. It's hard to get promoted when people are getting laid off.

What I should have done instead was to start the promo process from Day 1. This is also a good thing as it shows to your manager that you are ambitious to keep making high impacts. Getting promoted is a win-win game both for yourself as well as for the company. After starting the promo doc with my manager, I was more aware of what I had and what I didn't have. In every 1 on 1 with my manager we discussed the accomplishments table of the promo doc, and kept filling the gaps until my manager felt ready to bring up the doc to the higher ups and eventually I passed the reviews and I got promoted.

These kinds of things are very unclear initially. No one really tells you what to do. You have to be able to think by yourself and take action by yourself. As a software engineer, you are given a lot of freedom, but you are also expected to be an independent thinker and high impact contributor. Most engineers get to learn this over time, but it would have helped me if someone taught me these things earlier.

Here's my conclusion of this reflection: The important things I discussed are focusing on your impacts, getting out of your comfort zone, and practicing DSA skills. Start as early as possible and focus on understanding what you have and what you don't have, and then start filling those gaps. 5 years is pretty long, but it also felt really short for me. I hope to keep growing as a software engineer. For people getting into this industry, learn to enjoy what you are doing. Tech has a very creative and impact based culture. Enjoy your projects and your results. Always be curious and learn new things.
